    Author: Björn-Egil Dahlberg <egil(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standard Track
    Created: 05-Jan-2011
    Erlang-Version: R15A
    Post-History:
****
EEP XXX: Hashmap
----



Abstract
========

Erlang should introduce a new datatype, the map, '#{ Key=Value }'.


Specification
=============

Declaration syntax,

        #{ a = 1 },
        #{ 1 = 2, b = b },
        #{ A = B },
        #{ {A, B} = c }.

	#{ expr_max = expr }.

	ROK alt.

	<{ expr_max ~ expr }>.


where,
    A and B are any erlang term.

Matching syntax, the simple stuff

        handle_call(Msg, From, #{ state = start } = S) ->
        ...
            {reply, ok, S};
        handle_call(change, From, #{ state = start } = S) ->
        ...
            {reply, ok, S#{ state = changed} };

More matching syntax, calculating frequency

        freq(Is) -> freq(Is, #{}).
        freq([], M) -> map_to_list(M).
        freq([I|Is], #{I = C} = M) -> freq(Is, M#{I = C + 1});
        freq([I|Is], M) -> freq(Is, M#{ I = 1 });

Same code with gb_trees for comparison,

        freq(Is) -> freq(Is, gb_trees:empty()).
	freq([I|Is], T) ->
            case gb_trees:lookup(I, T) of 
                none -> freq(Is, gb_trees:enter(I, 1), T);
                {value, V} -> freq(Is, gb_trees:enter(I, V + 1, T))
            end;
        freq([], T) -> gb_trees:to_list(T).


Comprehensions,

        #{ K = V*2 || K,V @ Map, is_integer(V) }
        #{ I = I*2 || I <- lists:seq(1,10) }
        #{ B = B*2 || B <= <<1,2,3>> }

	<{ K ~ V || K,V ~ Map, is_integer(K) }>.
	<{ I ~ I*2 || I <- lists:seq(1, 10) }>.

Motivation
==========

The key reason is to lessen the literal impact on the source code and the language.

For instance, the two normal ways of sending options to a functions are either via
records or via property lists. Both has some drawbacks. Records are compile time
dependent and syntactic sugar for tuples. Property lists are generic but produces
a lot of texts when defining them and operating on them.

Consider this example when parsing of arguments,

        args(["-r" | Args], Opts) -> 
            args(Args, [{analyze, true}     | proplists:delete(analyze, Opts)]);
        args(["-s="++File | Args], Opts) -> 
            args(Args, [{suppression, File} | proplists:delete(suppression, Opts)]);
        args([Target], Opts) -> 
            [{target, Target} | proplists:delete(target, Opts)].
        
        args(Args, [{analyze, false}, {suppression, false}, {target, none}]).

The literal impact is quite heavy when operating on property lists.

If we instead use some kind of hash, what would happen?

        args(["-r" | Args], Opts)        -> args(Args, Opts#{ analyze = true });
        args(["-s="++File | Args], Opts) -> args(Args, Opts#{ suppression = File});
        args([Target], Opts)             -> Opts#{ target = Target}.
    
        args(Args, #{ analyze = false, suppression = false, target = none}).

The performance point could also be argued, it should be much faster operation on 
a hash then on lists, O(1) instead of O(n), but that case will not be argued yet.

So what about records, the syntax is very near the same. Yes, that the point, but
with one crucial difference. We do not have to specify the record.
 


Rationale
=========





Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


