    Author: Björn-Egil Dahlberg <egil(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standard Track
    Created: 05-Jan-2011
    Erlang-Version: R15A
    Post-History:
****
EEP XXX: Syntax extensions
----



Abstract
========

Erlang should introduce a new datatype, the map, '#{ Key=Value }'.

More over, the dot syntax for accessing maps must be abolished. Currently it is used for records but it will not be used for maps.

For accessing Maps (,Lists and Tuples) lets use an association operator: Value = CompoundTerm '[' Key ']'.

To select multiple values from a List, Tuple or Map I propose a select operator '^'. 
The select operator should select a specific set of values, in order, to a given compund term.
The operator was originally intended to select a specific set (list) of values from a map but any compund term will work.


Specification
=============

Map declaration syntax,

        #{ a = 1 },
        #{ 1 = 2, b = b },
        #{ A = B },
        #{ {A, B} = c }.

        #{ expr_max = expr }.

where,
    A and B are any erlang term.


Access syntax,

        1 = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}[a].
        2 = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}[b].
        A = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}.
        2 = A[b].

Hat syntax for type conversions and multiple selections

        [2,1] = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}^[b,a].

'^' reads, select from our left with keys 'b' then 'a' to a list.

        {1,2} = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}^{a,b}
        A     = #{ a = 1, b = 2, c = 3}.
        [1,2] = A^[a,b].
        B     = [a,b].
        [1,2] = A^B.

This also maps over to any other compound term, i.e.

        {a,a,1} = [a,b,c,1]^{1,1,4}.


More fun with syntax
====================

How about matching strings or iodata() in functions,

        f1(/([a-z]+)\K([0-9]+)\V/, M) -> M#{ K = V };
        f1(_,M) -> M.

        f2(Ls) -> f2(Ls, #{}).
        f2([L|Ls], M) -> f2(Ls, f1(L, M));
        f2([], M) -> map_to_list(M).

The very first clause in the first function uses a regular expression in the first argument. It will take literals such as "abc123" and "def456", split and match them. "abc" will be bound to variable K and "123" will be bound to variable V. K will be the key for value V in map M.

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


